>>Dr. Metzner is co-founder and
president of the Green Earth
Foundation, an educational
organization devoted
to healing and harmonizing the
relationships between humanity
and the Earth.
Psychotherapist and professor
at the California Institute
of Integral Studies who
has been exploring states
of consciousness,
entheogens, shamanism,
and transformational
practices for over 30 years.
Ever since he helped found
the Harvard Psilocybin Project
in 1960 with Timothy
Leary and Ram Dass.
Let us give a warm
welcome to Ralph Metzner.
[APPLAUSE]
>>Well, I am very
happy to be here.
There are some very old
friends of mine here
who've been friends for a long
time and some new friends.
Actually my work and
consciousness research
and exploration
started 40 years ago.
And 1961 was the
year I first took
a psychoactive
psychedelic substance
at Harvard University, where
I was a graduate student.
So that's 40 years ago.
And I would say that it
was a kind of a rebirth.
It changed my life from
that point on completely.
And I might describe
it in this way.
That it turned my mind
inside out and outside
in at the same time.
And the astrologers
among you might
be interested to know that it
coincided with my progressed
Mercury turning direct
from being retrograde.
Now, what that meant
was, I'll give you
a scene from that experience.
I took it at the house that
Tim Leary was living in.
And the occasion
was that we were
going to start this project
working with prisoners, giving
them psilocybin to produce
inside experiences.
And Leary said, well, in
order to give this experience
to people, you have
to have it first.
And so we tried it out and
several of us were there.
And at one point it was an
amazing experience, which
I won't go into the details.
But this one little incident
kind of encapsulated
what I'm trying to say.
I walked out of the
house, actually,
to get some fresh air.
As I went out of
the house, there
was a garbage can sitting right
next to the entrance door.
And I sort of glanced at
it and then I walked on.
And in that moment
I stopped in my mind
and I thought, wait a minute.
Why did I just walk on?
I realized I had a program
in my mind of that's garbage,
you don't look at
it, you just go.
You don't look at it.
And then I realized
that that was
a completely automatic
reaction and that I
didn't have to do that.
I didn't have to think that
automatic thought which
automatically
controlled my behavior.
I could in fact choose
to look at the garbage
and then go on or not.
And that was a revelation.
It might seem like
a small thing.
But from that point, I realized
that my mind was completely
conditioned It was
completely automatic.
And that could change.
Otherwise I could choose
how to direct my mind.
I could choose what to look
at and what not to look at.
I could choose what to
think and what not to think.
And that would make a
tremendous difference.
And I've been practicing
that ever sense.
And Buddhist
mindfulness meditation
tries to teach people
the same thing.
Is the sound
working OK this way?
OK.
So I said I would talk about
shamanic entheogenic cosmology
and visionary
experience, but I'd
like to change that slightly.
And I said some things about
cosmology in the little
write up.
What I'd like to talk about
instead, which is related,
is visionary experience
and divination.
And you could say that visionary
experiences are experiences
beyond the realm, the ordinary
realm of time and space,
of conventional thinking,
that occur to us spontaneously
or in certain situations.
It could happen in dreams.
Divination is a practice,
intentional purpose
of practice, to bring about
access to nonordinary reality
and expanded state
of consciousness.
What does divination mean?
It means communication
with the divine world.
Also called traditionally
the spirit world.
Or anthropologists might
call it nonordinary reality.
In some of the
European traditions,
it was called the other world.
And it is another world.
And you enter into the other
world in an altered state
of consciousness.
But that doesn't mean it's
purely a subjective experience.
I mean, the experience
is subjective,
but the world actually exists.
And I would say there are
two primary differences
between shamanic cosmology,
which arises naturally
out of psychedelic and
entheogenic experiences
and others, and the traditional
worldview that we have,
which is the worldview
of materialist science.
And I agree with
Robert Patrick Wilson
who said, well, science actually
doesn't believe that Newtonian
Cartesian worldview anymore.
But the problem is
that we still do.
I mean, most of us brought
up having high school science
and living in a world
of material objects
in which material
objects are regarded
as the only real thing.
So the one main difference
between a shamanic worldview,
cosmology, and this
modernistic worldview,
which we're trying
to get beyond,
is that in the traditional
view, there are many worlds.
There is not just
one level of reality.
This material physical
substance of level
that you can touch and weigh.
But there are many, equally
real, not merely subjective,
not merely fantasy,
not merely mystical.
And some scientists
have tried to find
ways to describe this
multi-dimensionality
in scientific language.
Traditional shamanism,
for example,
says there's upper world,
middle world, and lower world.
So you could say, it
would be true to say
that the traditional shamanic
animistic worldview is
larger and more comprehensive.
Because it doesn't say that
the material world is not real
and say the other
worlds are more real.
It says they're equally real.
The other big difference between
the traditional indigenous
shamanic animistic worldview
and the modern worldview
is that in these many worlds,
including this material world,
there are many beings
besides human beings.
Of course, we know animals
and plants and so forth.
We recognize them as beings.
Traditional people
recognize all beings
as having a spiritual essence.
That's called animism.
Everything has a
spiritual essence.
Trees, mountains, rivers,
animals, plants, places.
They're called spirits.
Not a symbol.
Within a materialist worldview,
including the worldview
of modern psychology,
including Jungian psychology,
these beings are
regarded as symbols.
Perhaps archetypal
symbols, which
is kind of more grand
than ordinary symbols.
But what does that really mean?
Or it'll say it's part
of the unconscious,
or part of the
collective unconscious.
So let me give you
a little story that
illustrates the difference
between shamanism
and psychology.
Little scenario.
I'm a psychologist.
I do psychotherapy.
Supposing a person comes into
the psychotherapist office
and says, well, I had
this dream about a bear.
And the psychologist,
if he's a Freudian,
he might say, well, that's
probably a father complex
and we'll work with
that and analyze it.
If he goes to a
Jungian, the Jungian
might say well,
that's great mother.
Great mother bear.
Archetypal like that.
If it's a gestalt
therapist he'd say,
well, it's clearly
a part of your mind,
so let's do a gestalt
dialogue with it.
Put the bear on a chair,
talk back and forth with it.
It's a part of your mind.
Always a part of your mind.
Unconscious mind maybe.
If you went to a
shamanic practitioner,
you might not say that.
He might say, well, you
had an encounter with bear.
Great Bear, capital B Bear.
The spirit of Bear,
the deity of Bear.
And if that's the case,
the shamanic practitioner
certainly would admit there are
symbolic dreams and fantasies.
But if it's a being and
you treat it as a symbol,
you could be in trouble.
It will be considered
disrespectful.
If I meet you in the
street and I treat you
as a symbol of something in
my mind, that's disrespectful,
isn't it?
You wouldn't like it.
You'd be offended.
Women are offended if
they're treated as a symbol,
as an object.
It's called objectification.
So part of a
shamanic practice is
to learn to distinguish between
the real beings that you might
encounter and which you can
have a real communication with
and those fantasies
and imaginings
that we ordinarily have,
which we all have plenty of.
Let me tell you a joke.
Actually a cartoon from The New
Yorker that's about prophecy.
And it shows a man on the
street wearing a sandwich board
with signs.
And it said, "Jesus is coming."
And then behind him was
another man, Oriental looking,
also had a sandwich board
that said "Buddha, here now."
[LAUGHTER]
It gets better the longer
you think about it.
And it reminds me of a
story about be here now.
And Ram Dass, who is
here now, as we all are.
And a couple years ago we
were in a meeting together.
And I had this insight or
understanding about the phrase
the hereafter to describe
the afterlife existence.
There's an old
fashioned English phrase
which isn't much used anymore.
But the hereafter, you
talk about somebody
when they're deceased.
They're in the hereafter.
It's kind of a nice phrase.
I kind of like it.
So then I was thinking about
the phrase be here now.
And then I really thought,
well, as a maxim of philosophy,
maybe one should extend it to
say, be here now and hereafter.
[LAUGHTER]
Be here now and hereafter.
And so I actually had this
with my friend Ram Dass.
And he laughed, he
thought it was cute.
And then he said, well, I think
be here now actually covers it.
Which is true.
Because it covers both
the here and the after.
When you're in the hereafter,
you want to be here now too.
OK so I want to talk
about divination.
And then if you're willing, I'd
like to do a method divination
practice with you.
And I want to leave some time
at the end for questions.
So I'm going to try very hard
to stay within my time frame.
So very, very
briefly, I distinguish
between two main
kinds of divination.
Divinations relating to the
past, which relate to healing.
Healing, it seems to
me, always involves
going into the past in some
way, both in modern therapy
and traditional
methods of healing.
And then visioning,
which is future oriented.
And I've actually come
to think of-- well,
so healing, going into the
past, you use regression.
The kind of therapy I
do, I call regression.
You start with an
existing problem.
Many therapists work this way.
And you find the
origin of the problem.
And it may be in
childhood or it may
be in pare-natal
or prenatal issues.
Or even going all the
way back to conception.
It may involve
ancestral patterns.
What family system
therapists call
transgenerational influences,
inherited patterns
of behavioral plot
as well as genetic.
Or it may be past
life, karmic patterns.
And shamanic healing practices,
it's not that different.
You do a regression.
You find either there's been an
intrusion or, like we would say
an infection by a bacteria,
virus, or microbe, or something
like that, and you find that.
Or in traditional societies,
you might say, well,
there was a sorcery.
There was something
that was put into you
and then you have
to take that out.
Or the other kind of
regression, healing regression
that people might
do, would be where
they feel like a part
of their identity
has been split off or due
to shock or trauma there's
been a kind of a freezing.
And people who've
been traumatized
feel that a part of them has
been locked up in that event.
And then with healing practices,
you were to undo that.
And shamanism is
called soul retrieval.
Like a split off part of one's
sense of identity is retrieved.
And that often
involves catharsis.
But one conclusion
that I've come to,
in terms of healing regressions,
is that catharsis by itself
isn't enough.
Catharsis is the kind of purging
of the negative stuff that's
associated with that event.
And then you are
understanding of that event.
Your perception, your
knowing and feeling of it,
has to be integrated
into who you are.
That's how you know
that you're healed
from a traumatic past event
or a traumatic unfinished past
entanglement is when
you can recognize it
as part of your history, but not
long anything that blocks you
from moving ahead.
I have to tell you a
little story about therapy
that I learned from a German
therapist called Bert Hellinger
that I like very much.
He tells this story.
He says, a polar bear
was kept by a circus.
And since he moved around
a lot and they kept him
in a very small cage with
very limited movement,
we could take two steps
forward and two steps back.
That's all the
movement he could do.
So that's what he did, day
in and day out, for 20 years.
Then the circus
decided they didn't
want the polar bear anymore
and they sold him to a zoo.
In the zoo, the bear had a
large area to roam around in.
But he walked two steps
forward and two steps back.
Another bear came to him and
said, "Why are you doing that?"
And the bear said, "Well, I
lived in a cage for 20 years
where I could only
walk two steps forward
and two steps back."
That's the story.
See, he did have a choice.
But he didn't
exercise the choice.
So what I observe and what
I believe to be true, maybe,
mostly, is that in
addition to catharsis,
the re-experiencing
of something painful,
there needs to be
an integration.
And the integration for complete
healing, the integration
involves bringing
that understanding
into your present
sense of who you are so
that he can then
say, OK, that event
was in my past in my history.
And now I'm going to go get
on with the rest of my life
the way I choose to.
OK, before going to
talk about visioning,
I guess I want to
say a little bit more
about healing regression.
So there's this
twofold movement.
You may go back
to childhood, you
may go back to pre
and para-natal.
You may go back to past
karma, karmic reincarnations,
past lives.
People can go all the
way back to conception.
Our old friend,
Timothy Leary, he
wrote about the experience
of your conception.
He wrote a chapter in
his book "Flashbacks,"
my conception of my conception.
People can re-experience
that conception.
And what happens
at conception is
that all the imprints--
well of course
the genetic chromosomal
genetic fusion of the mother
line and the father
line takes place.
We know that.
But in addition, there's
a psychological imprinting
that takes place.
Everything that the mother
and father with thinking,
feeling, experiencing about
themselves, about their bodies,
about their sexuality.
Because conception is a sex act.
And I've had experiences
working with people,
taking them back to
their conception,
where it was a revelation
for them to think that they
arose out of an act of love.
To really take that in.
Because it had not been part
of their conscious experience
of feeling their parents
being in an act of love.
Leary found that his
conception was his parents
were both drunk.
[LAUGHTER]
His father was a dentist
on a military base.
It's not implausible at all.
In fact, I would venture to
guess in a certain generation
it was quite frequent.
You'd have to wonder
what effect that
might have on the conception,
what kind of an imprint
that would leave.
In terms of teachings of
the spiritual and mystical
tradition where conception is
a place where a soul enters
into human form,
biological form and starts
forgetting and starts losing the
connection to the spirit world,
to the soul world.
The wonderful poem
by Wordsworth where
it talks about a child coming
in being born, trailing
clouds of glory.
And then progressively
forgetting,
forgetting, forgetting.
Starting at conception,
the earliest.
Veils come in and
massive forgetting
at the time of birth.
And there's always the
possibility of remembering.
Remembering.
See, what is remembering?
Re-connecting back which
has been dismembered.
So when you regress,
you may go back
to the origin of--
so as you go back,
you can go back all the way to
the origin, your own origin,
the source of your beginning.
The Buddhists have this koan.
And a koan is a question
you don't really answer.
You just keep asking it.
What was your original
face before you were born?
I have a new version
of that koan.
It's the same koan.
It goes like this.
What was your soul's vision
for this incarnation?
I should correct that.
What is your soul's vision
for this incarnation?
Which is still
happening, isn't it?
It's not over.
So ultimately regression
may be regression
to the source of your being,
the core of your being.
That's a metaphor
for mystic quest.
And then there's an original
vision, the original face.
Then there's the
forgetting that comes on.
Prenatally,
perinatally, childhood.
Progressive
forgetting, forgetting.
I want to share with you
a poem by David Whyte that
talks about vision.
The soul's vision and forgetting
thereof and the remembering
thereof.
It's called "Vision
on the Hills."
"That full view of the world
seeing as a child, barely
understood, a flight
of half remembered
doves and red leaves
and violent rustle
from the wind that followed.
Stone walls climbed the hilltops
through thunder and sleeping
rain, entering the mist
that drew me on paths where
everyone, every stone stood
single, opening like eyes
to other worlds.
The black-faced sheep snaking
out of moss and the stone barns
buttressed by old stones
and an older time,
to which I knew by seeing
this, by seeing now,
belong to me as I to them.
Welded by the heat of full
attention, sustained by time,
held up for all by youth, too
caught in the ordinary miracle
to worry what was past and
what was present or beyond it.
Whether the bright
vision itself could fade.
It could.
It did.
It seems we slide
down the long curve
of years falling through
time until we wake or dream
like this.
The window open to find us
brazen miracle momentary fresh
before we lose our faith again.
Almost desperate, searching
through the crowded years,
we meet ourselves a final time.
Trying to touch him, hold
him by the shoulders,
teach us how to see again.
Hands climbed
bewildered to our eyes.
Too late we see everything,
we ask everything.
Who lost that vision?
Who?
Who lost that vision?"
You can feel the
wonderful mixture
of poignancy and longing
and hope in that poem.
So now I want to talk a little
bit about the other main class
of divination.
And divination in
relationship to healing
is also what we call diagnosis.
The other main kind
looks towards the future.
In fact, I've come to think
of memory and visioning
as the same basic
function, but looking
in different directions.
Or another way of saying
is that memory relates us
to the past the way visioning
relates us to the future.
And you might say, in
addition, awareness
relates us to the present.
And I've actually come to use
the image of the Roman deity
Janus as a symbol of that
bi-directional perception.
Janus is a deity of
doorways in ancient Rome.
Doorways and passageways.
And he has two faces facing
in opposite directions.
Memory and imagination
or imagery or visioning.
Or intuition might be
another way of saying it,
or precognition, prophecy.
These are all different ways
of looking at perception
directed into the future.
In the Nordic
dramatic myth complex,
there's also the story
of the Odin, the shaman
god, the knowledge seeking god.
And he's accompanied
by two ravens that
sit on his shoulders, flying
around the world every day,
bringing him news
of what's happening.
They're called Huginn and
Munin, and those names
mean thought and memory.
So one raven memory flies around
the world and the other one
also flies all the way around
the world, anticipating.
See, anticipating
the future, I think,
is a function that evolved
just like memory did.
It's as essential
to our survival.
In fact, I now, taking
Janus and the Huginn, Munin,
Odin's raven as my cue, have
a sort of a working hypothesis
that I'm working on, which says
that of our dreams at night,
I would say about half
of them are precognitive
and the other half past,
relate with the past.
And I'll tell you how
I first came upon this.
When I used to work as an
administrator at the school,
I used to have dreams
all the time of meetings
with other administrators.
And I would have
meetings all the time
with other administrators.
It's what administrators do.
They sit in meetings.
And I would write
down the dreams
and then I would look at
my date book as I went off.
And I noticed
something very strange,
which is that I seem to be
dreaming about meetings that
were already scheduled,
maybe about three or four
days in advance of a meeting
with person A and B then
I would have a
dream about meeting
with the person A and B.
And it was almost like
as if I was already kind of
working out on some level what
the meeting was about.
And then would notice that
I was already scheduled.
Something made me
think that it was,
that it occurred often
enough, and that I
could see that there was even
like a time lag, a typical time
lag.
And revelation
occurred to me when
I realized that I would never
have hit upon the notion
that they were precognitive
if I hadn't by chance
noticed the correlation in
my date book with my dreams.
Because, and this
is very significant,
the precognitive
prophetic future visions
don't come with a
label attached saying,
"This is a future vision."
They don't.
So you might think, well,
this is just some past vision.
This is just something
I'm making up.
The only time you know
when it's a future vision
is these are usually events
that psychologists have reported
anecdotally where
that a woman may have
a dream that the plane that
her husband is about to go on
is going to crash.
So she calls him up and
says, don't go on that plane.
And she knows it's
the future because he
hasn't gone on that plane yet.
But ordinary events
you wouldn't know.
So if you have the
hypothesis, as I now do,
that maybe dreams
are about the future,
then it makes you look at things
in dreams in a different way,
because dreams might be visions.
Now so what are visions?
The word vision is
itself not that good,
because it suggests
something passively.
Like televisions just sit
there and you take it in.
No, it's not really.
Guidance is a much better word.
Or in Portuguese, the Santo
Daime people who use ayahuasca,
their word for
vision in Portuguese
is miracao, which is a
combination with mira,
having to do with seeing, and
cao, having to do with acting.
You see yourself
doing something.
Like I saw myself doing meeting.
Or a classical vision experience
from the Bible, the New
Testament, is Joseph
the father of Jesus
as a dream in which the angel
comes to him and says, look,
Herod is killing
all the baby boys.
Take the wife and child,
saddle a donkey, go to Egypt.
Marching orders.
Instructions.
Do this.
This is the way to go.
Guidance.
So the symmetry between
visioning and remembering
goes even further.
I said that in memory,
healing memory,
you regress to the past.
You re-experience
something and then
you integrate it into yourself,
into your present sense
of where you are, which
tends to an expansion
of your sense of who you are.
Visioning is exactly the same.
Think of a young person
who has a vision,
I'm going to be a doctor.
Somehow he gets that vision,
So then he or she is
going to start taking
the steps to make that real.
Like go to medical school.
Iroquois said many
of our problems,
particularly mental
psychiatric problems,
stem from having a vision,
having had a vision,
and ignoring or neglecting it.
Or even going against it.
And Native American people
put a lot of emphasis
on a vision quest.
Vision quest.
Seeking a vision.
Seeking, you might say, to
remember the soul's vision.
Why am I really on this Earth?
If you can know
that, then that helps
make all kinds of
other decisions
as to what's important
and what's not important.
Now, very kind of subcategory
of visions about the future
also relate to the past.
And they go like this.
I call them change
of course visions.
And the subjects in a
study done by Charles Grob,
Dennis McKenna, and
Callaway in Brazil,
with members of the
UDB church, which
is a Brazilian church
which uses ayahuasca,
what they call huasca, in
the religious services.
And they did interviews
with them and medical tests
and so forth.
And a characteristic of
stories that many of them told
was that when they
drank the ayahuasca
they had a vision
on themselves either
sick in a hospital or
destitute or in prison or dead
from illnesses.
And that vision caused them
to change their direction.
The vision was showing
them, if you continue
on this path of say, addiction
or abuse or criminality,
you're going to
end up in this way.
Sick or dead or
crazy or in jail.
And so it's like OK, so
then they don't go there.
Then they had that choice.
This is like running
out the scenario.
This is what will happen if
you continue on this path.
So then that gives you
that moment of choice.
And say, OK, I'm not
going to do that.
I want to choose
a different path.
This is a change of.
Direction
I actually want to go back and
give you an additional example
of the kind of dream
that I mentioned where
you're anticipating something.
You can think of it as I
have a dream of a meeting.
I like rehearsing the dream,
rehearsing the meeting.
And I told this story,
this observation
that I'd made in a
group not too long ago.
And there was a
surgeon in the group.
And he said that he himself and
other surgeon colleagues of him
quite frequently dream a
complete surgery the night
before they're
going to perform it.
And I really felt
good about that.
I hope that my surgeon,
if I ever have surgery,
dreams the entire
surgery the night before.
I want him to know it that well
and to practice it in his head
before he actually does it.
And I actually kind
of have a theory
which one could
research that I think
athletes and
performers, musicians,
actors may very well
do the same thing.
So it's a kind of a rehearsal.
Now here's a general observation
about visioning and prophecy
that I've also made.
And this will be relevant to
the exercise we're going to do.
Let's see how we're
doing on the time thing.
OK.
So when you start seeking a
vision and getting a vision,
your first task is to get
your own vision for yourself,
for your life.
And it can be then
more specific.
You can ask for a vision
of your creative field
or at your work, your career.
You can ask revision and seek
the vision of a relationship.
What's the future of a
relationship going to be?
And people in the business
in the corporate world
are very interested in
visioning, much more
so than therapists.
Therapists are more
interested in the past.
But people in the corporate
and organizational world
are very interested
in the future,
much more than the past.
They want to get a vision of
what the company's going to do.
Is it going to succeed or fail?
So after you have a vision
of your personal future,
that's a core practice.
People who practice
this kind of thing
also develop the
ability to have visions
of the more general kind for
a collective or for others.
And this is called prophecy.
And professional, you might
say, forecasting divination.
Shamanic divination differs
from what people call futurism.
Futurist is poor forecasting.
Only in the sense that if
you go into an altered state
and you use nonordinary
means to attain
that vision, that view, that
perception of the future.
Which is always probability.
It is not ever
certainty, as we know.
And it's clear also
why that is so,
why you have to be clear about
your own vision and purpose
first.
Because if you're
not, you're going
to get your own wishes and
fears and anxieties that
are going to interfere with
your clear perception of larger
scale phenomena.
Because emotions
like fear, desire,
they will tend to cloud
and distort perception.
And that's prophecy.
Among the ancient
dramatic people,
there was a class of
professional seeresses,
women seers called verbas.
And they would go around and
do prophecy professionally
for people that they would
go into an altered state
and somebody would ask them.
A chieftain might
ask them, well,
what's going to be the
outcome of this battle
that I have planned?
Or a couple might ask, is
this a favorable marriage
to be involved in?
Or people might ask,
are my sons coming back
from the sea, a
fishing expedition
that they're on and so forth.
And she would go into an altered
state by chanting and singing
and then she may cast the runes
or she would have a seeing.
And it was documented
that, for example,
in things like war that
people who would not do it.
If the verbas said no,
this is not a good outcome,
they would cancel it.
And there were these verbas,
they had this special gift.
The Daime people
actually believed
that women have this seership
gift more naturally than men.
But anyone can to learn to
develop it, including men.
And when you're doing healing
regressions into the past,
if you go far enough, you get
to birth and then conception,
your soul's origin.
You do healing visions
about your future.
You come to death, don't you?
It's interesting.
The future is all probabilities.
But there's one
thing that's certain.
All the roads into the
future, the different roads
that you might choose, that
each one of us might choose,
they all have the same ending.
Death and taxes
was the only thing
was certain was once said.
But it's really death.
Even taxes are not really
that certain as death is.
There's a certain
shamanic process
where they have you
choose the road that
leads to your own dying.
To actually choose it
rather than not choose it.
Just find yourself staggering
along it unconsciously,
blindly, wondering
where you're going.
Now that's not morbid at all.
It's actually very liberating.
I can feel you're actually
doing it as I'm suggesting it.
Maybe many of you
have done it before.
It's good to do
it over and over.
Socrates reputedly
said, philosophers
are those who
practice dying daily.
Daily.
And I've worked a lot
with people getting
a vision of their dying.
And then I re-found
a passage in a text
by Bernardo de Sahagun who
was a Franciscan friar who
wrote about the mushroom
cults, Mexican magic mushroom
cults of the Aztecs that they
reported in the 16th century.
He wrote in detail and had
informants describe to him
mushroom teonancatl.
The Spanish, by and large,
thought that the mushroom cult
was devil's worship.
Clearly anything that wasn't
Christian was devil's worship.
But Bernardo de Sahagun was
sort of in his reporting,
you could see, it's
kind of interesting,
he was sort of
partially sympathetic.
He became partially sympathetic
to what they were doing.
So his informant, this gathering
where people took mushrooms,
and they said they
foresee their own death.
And some of them
see that they're
going to fall off a
roof and die and others
see that they're drowning.
And then some of
them see that they're
going to die really
peacefully and happily.
He had to admit
that at first it's
like, what a nutty thing to
do, think about your own death
and have hallucinations
about your own death.
And clearly devil's thing.
But then some of
them died happily.
And some of them had visions
that they would be slave owners
or that they would do successful
at one thing or another.
Even non death, dying visions.
So through the visioning
and divination process,
you can come to have a deeper
sense of your own origin
and why we're even
here in this lifetime.
And the entry of the
soul into the human form
and then the exit of the
soul from the human form
continue on in other forms.
I'll give you another
problem that's
a vision like that, end vision.
It's by someone called
Ralph Metzner, who
was a psychologist who
lived in the second half
of the 20th century.
I call it "Shaman Song." "During
the first half of my life
I wove the threads and
textures of my experience
into a multi-colored
tapestry that
in the ending half
of this journey
has become a magical carpet
in which I shall sail away
over the mountains into
the worlds of the mystery."
So one last point I want to
make about future visions
and then we'll do a
divination practice.
And I've become very
interested, as many of us are,
in collective visions.
Meaning not only our
personal visions, but what's
happening to us as a society.
What's happening to this planet.
Actually, this is a time
when many, many visions,
collective visions, visions
of our collective future
are being produced
by the scientists,
by visionaries of all kinds,
using all kinds of methods.
Let me make a point about that.
So you get the vision and
then you integrate it.
You do a healing, and
That's called realization.
Integrating the vision is called
realization, making it real.
The child who had the
vision of being a doctor,
he then makes it real.
So it's a homeostatic
feedback system, isn't it?
People say the change
of course vision.
You are giving feedback
by your own future,
by your own guiding spirit.
If you go on that route, that's
not where you want to be.
So then you change direction.
Here's a fact that is
one of the facts that
leads many people increasingly
to say that this civilization
is going to collapse.
In fact, it is
collapsing, actually.
It's not impending.
And a few years ago, a panel of
2,800 international scientists,
American international
Nobel Prize winners,
issued a scientist warning to
humanity on global morning.
Remember that?
They said burning
of fossil fuels,
global warming,
catastrophic, changes.
If we don't make certain
changes and corrections,
reducing carbon
emissions, we're going
to get massive flooding,
weather instability.
Huge impacts on life in
all parts of the globe.
So the scientists had a vision.
They ran out the scenarios.
They said this is a thing.
What was supposed to happen
was a change of course.
Now, if there's a
change of course,
then the system moves in
a different direction.
A self correction
is supposed to work.
Now we have leaders
who ignore the warning
and actually do the opposite.
Now what's that going to do?
Our leaders, the leaders of
the so-called American empire.
Not the people universally
against the scientists,
ignoring them,
ignoring the warnings
of their own scientists.
Ignore the warnings
of other governments
who want to follow the warnings
and adjust their policies.
Saying no, we're not
going to do that.
We're going to continue
doing the other, which
is going to increase the
instability even more.
That means collapse.
There's no two ways about it.
Now you can still try to
make corrections later,
but every delay means you're
further down that road.
In the Eddas, the ancient
poems of the nomadic people
which were written down
in about the 10th century,
they had this vision of the end
of the world called Ragnarok.
And this end time vision has
many aspects and many levels
of interpretation.
You can interpret
it psychologically,
socially, globally,
meteorologically.
Climate changes, all
those things are in it.
And they're kind of
mingled together.
And the core of it is that
there are these world destroying
monsters.
And gods that are bound.
These world destructive
monsters are bound.
And the gods and
certain human warriors,
they have a final battle where
these monsters come loose
from their bindings.
And then there's a
battle between the gods
and the heroes on one side
and the monsters on the other.
And the world
destroying monsters
include Midgard,
which is a water
serpent that floods the Earth.
And it includes Surtr, who is
a fire giant, a volcanic fire
giant, accompanied
by many other fire
giants, who burns the Earth.
And it includes this
wolf, gigantic wolf
called Fenris wolf who
has this gigantic jaw.
And the upper jaw of the
Fenris wolf scrapes this sky.
And the lower jaw of the
Fenris wolf scrapes the Earth.
Scraping the sky,
shredding the ozone layer.
Scraping the Earth, gouging
minerals and oil out
of the earth.
Poison drips from the
fangs of the Fenris wolf.
Acid rain.
This is a picture of what's
happening on the planet.
And yet we're here in
the beautiful cathedral
on a beautiful summer day.
We're living in the midst of
a civilizational and global
collapse, catastrophic collapse.
It's almost like
there's no villagers
on the fangs of the Fenris wolf
as it's scraping the Earth.
So there's this gigantic battle.
The monsters do get killed.
Who are the gods?
The gods are the forces
of the principles
of knowledge, justice, courage,
compassion, generosity.
All the things we value.
They're our allies.
They're our guides
and ancestors.
And they're all defeated.
The monsters are defeated
and the gods are defeated.
And recently I've been working
with this notion coming
from that vision.
And I've come to
allow the thought
to really sink in
that we are being,
we will be defeated actually.
Now you may say, Metzner,
you've taken too many drugs
and turned into a doom
and gloom prophet.
I don't mean it
in that way at all
and I hope you understand that.
I find that actually
a liberating thought.
To accept the fact
that we will be
defeated, that the
forces of destruction
will play themselves out.
I don't say have
to play themselves,
but they will play
themselves out.
That actually
frees up the energy
to do whatever it is that
you're going to do and give it
your best shot.
I learned that from also that
teaching from Captain Paul
Watson, who was the founder of
the Sea Shepherd Society, who
takes boats out to confront
these huge sailing whaling
vessels and others.
And he says, when
you work in that way,
you have to recognize that
you won't actually stop
the destruction of the world.
Because these monsters
include our own corporations.
The collaborations of the
design that we've created.
We've created many of
these monsters that
are destroying the world.
And that's what
they're designed to do.
They're designed to
rip everything out
of the earth that can
be modified and sold.
But the Ragnarok ends
with a vision of renewal.
After the gods are defeated
and then a new generation
of gods and a new generation
of human beings comes.
And they say--
They say that a new green
Earth arises from the sea.
A new green Earth
rises from the sea.
The eagle flies across
the mountain again hunting
for fish.
And the humans sit together
and tell the stories,
remember the stories.
The eagle flies across the
mountain, hunting the fish.
Oh, and they say also
another part of the vision
is the grasses grow
again without being sown.
That's a vision of
restoring wilderness.
Pre-agriculture.
The nourishing herbs grow
again without being sown.
OK, now if you like, we
can do a little divination.
And one thing.
You can do divinations
in an altered state.
What you want to do is
you need to generate
a certain amount of energy.
In psychedelic work,
that energy is generated
with taking a psychedelic.
In breath work,
holotropic breath worth
is generated through breathing.
I'd like to have us experiment
with generating it with sound.
And so we'll do some
group chanting together
with this sound box.
I've got to watch the time here.
Well, we'll do that
anyway and going
to leave some time at
the end for sounding.
So if you breathe into
your heart's center
and then let the
breath of awareness
and the light fire from the
heart center expand from there.
And then let the
vibratory quality
of the heart center
come up to your throat
and be expressed out through
the throat as a sound.
And then we'll gradually
find the sounds
harmonizing themselves,
like the om sound,
harmonizing themselves
with each other.
And with this ground
tone being produced here,
creating a kind of a harmonious,
clear space of sound.
[CHANTING]
OK, as you're centered
in your heart's center.
Think of it as a
kind of a cave filled
with warmth and compassion.
And your breath, your awareness.
A clear space.
And we'll look into
the well of memory.
And the well of memory is at
the foot of the world tree.
So you can think that
the well is at your feet.
At the foot of your
tree of life axis.
And you're looking into it.
You're gazing into it.
You're looking at
your childhood.
Just getting a sense
of the whole arc
of your life as a child,
the formative years.
The place where you
lived, where you grew up.
Your mother and father, how
they looked to you then.
Different than
what they look now.
Brother or sister if any.
How it was.
Just getting an overall
sense of the quality,
the mood of your childhood.
Also how you related
to the natural world.
Animals, plants.
The great outdoors.
Then let your gaze
go even further down
into the well of memory to
earliest childhood, even
infancy.
See if you can remember
lying in your mother's arms.
Or other caretaker.
And that place of complete
safety and nurturance.
You're not actually leaving
your awareness of the here now.
A strand of your
awareness stays anchored
in your heart's center.
You're sending a strand down.
An eye, a seeing eye.
And then go further back to
the time of your conception.
Where mother and father came
together in an act of love.
When you began the vertiginous
journey towards you.
The soul.
Again, its journey
into human form.
Again.
What was your original
face before you were born?
And what was your soul's vision?
What is your soul's vision
for this incarnation?
And you may even ask
the further question,
the further divination
questions as to why you
chose these particular parents.
Your soul chose.
The personality forgets.
But it can remember.
Remember.
And then you bring that feeling,
that knowing and the feeling
and the sensing of
your soul's purpose,
you think of that as
coming down, coming
through, through the
mind, the mental body,
through the emotions,
emotional body.
Through the perceptions,
perceptual body.
Into the physical body,
into the cave of the heart.
In this way, the
prodigal child can
remember why you left the
divine world which was your home
and is your home to
which you will return.
When this journey is over.
So bring that
knowing and feeling
and sensing of
your soul's vision
into your present
sense of who you are.
Into the here now place.
Here we are on a May
Day in New York City.
In this gathering of seekers.
In this body.
These arms and legs,
these hands and feet.
It can be helpful to share
the visions that you've
had with someone else.
But we don't need to take
the time to do that now.
I'd like to suggest
that you maybe share it
or record it at least.
Write it down.
Notes from it, anything
that came to you.
>>You spoke about
integrating the vision.
Do you have any
distinctions about how
to integrate our visions?
>>How to integrate a vision?
The intention is the crucial
factor in obtaining a vision
and obtaining healing and
moving into an altered state
for divination.
In the Harvard
project, we called
it this phrase set and setting.
That the content of an
expanded consciousness
experiences a function of
the set and the setting.
Set is intention.
Or question.
Question or intention.
Divination takes place by
questioning, getting an answer.
So then the key to
integrating is also
to have the intention
towards integration.
Because that then is the choice.
Intention determines where
you direct your attention,
doesn't it?
If you have the
intention of healing,
then that's what you're
going to attend to.
If you have the
intention, if you
have a vision you're
going to be a doctor
or you're going
to be a musician,
then you would also then
would have the intention,
well, I'm going to
make that vision.
I'm going to
realize that vision.
It would be your choice.
Vision is guidance,
but it's not commands.
It's not certain.
You still have the
choice, as we know.
The people, the gang
in the White House
is choosing not to listen to
the visions that are suggested
a different course.
People can do that.
People can choose to go
against their vision.
They can choose to commit
crimes and horrible things
that they do.
But they can also
choose otherwise.
That's what I would say to that.
>>My question is, if you
feel our defeat is necessary,
what do you do to not abandon
the current situation,
the children of this time with
the Green Earth Foundation?
What is your action
for the present?
>>I don't feel
defeat is necessary.
I accept the fact that
we will be defeated.
I acknowledge that fact.
And that fact frees me
up from worrying about
whether what I do will
make any difference.
It allows me to focus on doing
what my vision tells me to do,
which is preserve life as
much as possible and those
of my children and those of the
people I come into contact with
and life, non-human life.
It's hard for people to get
that thing about defeat.
Because we're living in a part
of the globe that's doing OK.
But we could be living on a dump
heap, a trash heap in Manila
where 10,000 families
are trying to raise
their children on a trash heap.
Now, is that civilization?
Or is that a collapse
of civilization.
Does that answer your question?
>>How can you peel away
the levels of the self
and become more
authentic and real
and yet still develop your ego
in a healthy, authentic way?
>>That's one of those
psychological questions.
[LAUGHTER]
If I were a psychologist.
It's a complicated question.
I don't know if I
have any easy answers.
The question, as I
understand it, is about well,
psychologists say you have to
develop strong ego boundaries.
And then you have these
people called borderlines who
don't have any ego boundaries.
But then I'm talking about
having a vision and expanded
sense of self.
Isn't that going in
the opposite direction?
And some psychiatrists
and psychologists
have actually written that.
And they said, well,
people who have borderline
shouldn't practice
mystical practices.
And that may be true.
I don't know.
That may be true.
>>In another words,
with taking drugs,
a borderline taking drugs,
that would be self-destructive?
>>Yeah.
But then so are a lot of
other things that people do.
And maybe it could
help sometimes.
See, it all depends on
the set and the setting
and the inclinations.
I'm very disinclined to make
general rules for people.
As somebody who
works with people,
all I go with is
somebody comes to me
and says they would
like help in something.
Then I try to address that.
I'm not really interested
in building up a system
or making generalities.
And all the things I say,
I don't really expect you
to or even want you to really
believe them or take them
on faith because I've said them.
They're like observations
that I've made
and they may be true for you.
Maybe.
And that's for you to find out.
That's for you.
So I would be reluctant
to say to people,
doing that is destructive.
But if I encountered
a particular person,
and I have said that to some
people that I've worked with,
I don't think it's a good idea
for you to be taking drugs.
Basically it's
still that choice.
And you have to respect that.
I don't believe that
teachings if you often
hear that you have
to kill the ego
and you have to overcome the
ego in order to become mystical
or spiritual.
I think that's nonsense.
I mean, the ego
is like your hand.
Actually, there are many egos.
The hand is one.
Hand has an ego.
The eye has another ego,
the heart has an ego,
the genitals have ego.
[INAUDIBLE] said
every atom has an ego.
I mean, how many atoms
are there in a body?
That's billions and trillions.
So you don't want to
chop off your hand.
That's ridiculous.
But on the other hand,
the truth in that saying
is you want your hand to be
functioning under your control
how you choose.
Not your hand to be doing
its own thing, which is
called manipulation.
Good question though, thank you.
Well, it's 11:15.
So I think I should end.
But I want to end with a
poem, a visionary column.
A short one by D.
H. Lawrence, which
is about the relationship
between individual visionary
experience and the collective
madness of our social system.
"When we get out of the
glass bottles of our ego.
When we get out of the
glass bottles of our ego
and when we escape
like squirrels turning
in the cages of our personality
and get into the forests again,
we shall shiver with
cold and fright.
But things will happen to us so
that we don't know ourselves.
Cool, unlying life will rush
in, and passion will make
our bodies taut with power.
We shall stamp our
feet with new power
and old things will fall down.
We shall laugh and institutions
will curl up like burnt paper."
So thank you very much.
[APPLAUSE]